---
layout: post
title: "How to ask hard questions about your business and have your data answer them"
author: Oliver George
description: ""
category: thinking
tags: []
---
{% include JB/setup %}

There has been so much focus in the mainstream media and business
publications on "big data", "why you should have a big data strategy",
and so on, that it can be easy to lose sight of what data should
actually be used for.  This article is a very brief summary of the
main categories of queries your business should be making, and how.

A related perspective that is helpful to consider in this context is
the business value associated with the *time range* of a query.  From
the lowest to highest value, we have the current status (search,
operational reporting), historical data (historical reporting,
analysis, summaries), and future prospects (predictive analytics,
decision strategies).  These also have a corresponding increase in
implementation complexity.

**What happened?**

This tends to be the simplest question to answer.  People have been
generating reports and querying databases since the 1970s.

Your business is collecting data through a range of operational and
management systems.  All systems, big and small, provide a range of
common reports and access to underlying data in some form or another.

Data warehousing tools help to pre-process this operational data to
allow efficient reporting.  Business intelligence solutions help to
build and share reports, queries and dashboards.

**Why did it happen?**

Working out "why" tends to require a more exploratory approach.  It
requires analytical tools suited to ad-hoc queries which let you
drill-down and explore data interactively.

"Why" leads to a search for hidden meaning in data.  For instance, can
we explain what happened by identifying customer segments and
visualising their behaviour over time?  These insights come in two
forms; insights which explain, and insights which predict.  Both help
business compete effectively.

Business analytics tools provide rich interfaces for exploring data
interactively.

**What might happen?**

Decision-makers look at what has happened in the past and the insights
uncovered through analysis to inform plans for the future.  They also
establish processes to detect adverse events allowing early
intervention.

This is the land of dashboards, trends, thresholds, forecasts and
modelling.  The techniques vary but, at its core, learnings from the
past are used to uncover insights about the current situation and make
predictions about the future.  This is also the richest area of growth
in business analytics, as new possibilities are being uncovered all
the time (and as new tools are released).

Business analytics and modelling tools help detect and leverage
patterns in data which are difficult to uncover, visualise and
interpret by hand.
