---
layout: post
title: "BI as something all businesses can understand"
author: Oliver George
category: thinking
tags: []
---
{% include JB/setup %}

I've been reading some trade articles about Business Intelligence and
how businesses are benefitting.  The articles in question were
targeting large institutions such as banks but they raise issues which
apply more broadly, especially as the market evolves and tools
becoming more accessible.

**Firstly let's consider a couple of key terms.**  If all of the
information stored in your various business systems flowed back to a
single location you would call it a *Data Warehouse*.  And if you had
tools which allowed you to query and report on that data you would
have a *Business Intelligence* solution.

You can consider these as two halves of the same equation: what you
pull into your data warehouse you can take out via business
intelligence tools.

**So what does business life look like without this in place?**
Actually it probably looks like most businesses today, with data
stored in various different applications and databases.

You might, for example, have different system for sales, customer
support, accounting and managing your business processes.  It would be
typical to have a few indispensable excel spreadsheets about too.

**You probably manage this business with your sleeves rolled up.** To
make this all work you come to accept a certain amount of
time-consuming manual processes to copy data between systems, generate
reports, and keep everything in sync.  Psychologically, you've
probably given up asking hard questions of your data too because it
always ends up being a mess of data management and ultimately produces
results you just don't trust.

Staff within individual business units are happy with their tools but
that doesn't help when it comes to getting a full view of your
operations.

**You probably got to this point for very good reasons.** Over time
you chose best of breed tools for specific applications and when
things didn't quite work you adapted and accepted that some manual
processing was required.

**The problem is that the left hand doesn't know what the right hand is
doing.**  Data is disparate and trapped in different places.  As a
result you don't have an easy way to query it for reporting.

**Business intelligence promises to resolve these issues** by
establishing processes which gather data from these operational
systems and collect it up in a central location, a *data warehouse*,
so that from then on you have a consistent and well-organised set of
data about your whole organisation, ready for reporting via *business
intelligence* tools.

Once established it's going to be much quicker to answer business
questions based on current information.  This means more people in the
business will be able to interrogate this data, and as a result you
can encourage a
[culture of data-driven decision-making](http://www.economistinsights.com/technology-innovation/analysis/big-data-and-democratisation-decisions).

The labour equation changes too, as there will be less time spent
gathering / processing data and more spent analysis and reporting on
it.

As a business leader you'll be able to see how your business is
performing by establishing dashboards which track performance
indicators and status reports which stay fresh too.

**Please get in touch if you'd like to discuss further.** This article
hasn't covered how you might implement a business intelligence
solution, nor have we talked about some of the key opportunities it
can unlock.  We might save these for another day.


